Render Snapshots and Feature Integration

The tool-architecture lesson gave snapshots, commands, features, and cleanup separate owners. Rendering adds a timing constraint: positions and the camera that projects them must describe the same captured update. A well-organized tool can still draw incorrect markers if those values come from different moments.

This lesson applies that architecture to radar, overlays, aim analysis, and render hooks. The snippets describe interfaces inside a combined tool; the complete dispatcher and patch owners are linked below.

Section: One frame, one snapshot.

Diagram. From Target observer to Validated frame snapshot. From Validated frame snapshot to Radar model. From Validated frame snapshot to Overlay labels. From Validated frame snapshot to Aim analysis. From Radar model to Renderer. From Overlay labels to Renderer. From Aim analysis to Renderer.

Read and validate target data once per update. Features consume the same owned snapshot. In this excerpt, PlayerSnapshot is a local record of the player’s identity, position, and other validated fields; Mat4 holds the camera transform. Neither type borrows a pointer into the game:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Every feature receives the same owned set of fields from one bounded observation pass. If the radar reads the player list on one pass while the overlay independently reads the camera matrix a few milliseconds later, the features describe different updates, and markers can land where enemies used to be. Bundling the fields means both features use the same captured values. It does not make the reads atomic: the game can update an entity between two reads within that pass. Validate the resulting snapshot and, if the game exposes a tick or generation counter, check it before and after the copy or retry when it changes.

The camera matrix and viewport travel with the players for that exact reason. Projecting this frame’s positions through last frame’s camera is wrong in a way that looks almost right — everything is drawn slightly behind where it belongs, worst when you turn quickly, which makes it easy to blame the projection maths instead of the timing.

Vec<PlayerSnapshot> is owned rather than borrowed, so nothing here points back into the game. A feature holding a reference into an entity the game then frees is the stale-pointer failure from Lesson 1.8, arriving through the back door. Copy once, then let every feature read from the copy.

Section: Give render features a lifecycle.

A radar overlay needs a different per-frame action from a recoil patch, but both must answer the same lifecycle questions: when is it enabled, what does it do with this frame’s snapshot, and how does it undo its own changes? The interface below makes those moments explicit for every feature:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Only patching or hooking features need setup or restoration in enable and disable. A pure observer still implements those required methods, but they can return Ok(()); its useful work lives in update. The owner checks the result before reporting that a toggle succeeded.

Section: Model configuration with enums.

Three booleans named show_teammates, show_opponents, and show_everyone could all become true after a sequence of clicks. Yet the overlay can display only one of those modes at a time. Store that choice as one enum value, alongside the independent radar and debug switches:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

An enum prevents impossible combinations such as three different overlay booleans being true at the same time.

Section: Route input as commands.

A key press should request a change, not let the input thread reach into a feature while the update loop is using it. The input side can send a small command; the update loop then applies it to its own Settings. For example, CycleOverlay takes Off to Teammates and eventually back to Off:

Code example. The code’s comments explain: The update loop uses true to leave the loop and enter cleanup.fn apply_command(settings: &mut Settings, command: Command) to bool { match command { Command::ToggleRadar leads to settings.show_radar equals !settings.show_radar, Command::CycleOverlay leads to { settings.overlay equals match settings.overlay { OverlayMode::Off leads to OverlayMode::Teammates, OverlayMode::Teammates leads to OverlayMode::Opponents, OverlayMode::Opponents leads to OverlayMode::Everyone, OverlayMode::Everyone leads to OverlayMode::Off, }; } Command::ToggleDebugValues leads to { settings.show_debug_values equals !settings.show_debug_values; } Command::Stop leads to return true, } false}

The input thread sends commands through a channel. The update loop owns and changes the settings, avoiding shared mutable globals. A true return means it should stop taking frames and enter cleanup. The menu receives an acknowledgement after an enabled feature has actually changed state.

Section: Contain a render feature’s failure.

If a frame lacks a valid projection matrix, the overlay may fail while the radar and debug reader can continue. Each feature’s update returns a result. The owner records the error, marks that feature disabled, and calls its restoration path. Subsequent updates skip it; an error message alone would leave it running again on the next frame.

That local decision is valid only when the rest of the snapshot remains sound. A closed process or an invalid entity list stops every consumer. A missing camera may disable only screen projection. If a failing feature cannot restore its hook or patch, keep that failure visible and enter the shared shutdown path rather than treating a disabled checkbox as successful cleanup.

Section: Shut down in reverse order.

Diagram. From stop accepting input to signal update workers. From signal update workers to wait for workers to finish. From wait for workers to finish to disable features. From disable features to restore patches and graphics hooks. From restore patches and graphics hooks to close handles. From close handles to exit or unload.

Do not unload code while another thread may still execute it. Restoration must also happen on the thread or render boundary that owns the changed state. Stop the worker, wait for it to finish, and remove only the hooks this tool installed. A render callback may still be executing after the menu closes.

Section: Keep verified graphics facts with their target build.

An offset is a fact about one supported executable, not a universal property of an overlay. A profile joins build identity, module-relative locations, object layouts, and expected instruction bytes. Each feature receives verified facts from that profile rather than embedding another copy of an address.

A profile should make the supported game and version obvious. These constants join the concrete labs used by this combined tool; the complete project uses Option<usize> for facts a game does not need.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

At startup, verify an original instruction signature at every address you plan to use. The finished DLL, dynamic link library, dispatches by the current executable and exposes only hotkeys that belong to that exact game:

Table columns: Target; F1; F2; F3; F4; F5.

Target: Wesnoth 1.14.9; F1: terrain gold cave; F2: second-player stat text; F3: reveal map; F4: —; F5: —.

Target: AssaultCube 1.2.0.2; F1: triggerbot; F2: no recoil; F3: reveal radar; F4: aimbot; F5: internal ESP.

Target: Urban Terror 4.3.4; F1: memory wallhook; F2: OpenGL wallhack; F3: OpenGL chams; F4: —; F5: —.

End stops the worker and restores every active patch. Flare and Wyrmsun, the offline automation targets from Chapter 4, use their dedicated in-game loops instead of this function-key table.

Load one supported profile after fingerprinting the target. Features receive verified addresses and layouts instead of hardcoding them. If a profile has no address for a capability, that control must remain unavailable; None is not an invitation to reuse an address from another game.

The complete dispatcher and lifecycles are in dll.rs. The patch-owning primitives are in local_patch.rs; dropping each LocalPatch restores the bytes it captured only after an exact pre-patch verification.

Section: Check the combined render path.

The complete dispatcher and feature lifecycles bring the separate effects into one DLL, called the multihack in the original course. Test the connections as well as each effect:

radar and overlay consumers use the same captured player values;

camera and viewport changes cannot silently mix with an older frame ;

a disabled feature is skipped until the user deliberately enables it again;

each render callback restores the graphics state it changed;

each hook restores only its own verified original bytes ;

an unsupported game or build exposes no active feature controls;

shutdown waits for workers and callbacks before unloading code.

Keep a log of target, build, feature, address, expected bytes, found bytes, action, and restoration result, separate from the visible menu. Those records let a failed cleanup remain inspectable even after its UI closes.

The next lesson draws the menu inside the game’s frame. Its placement changes; the ownership, commands, and restoration rules still apply.

Full lesson, including exact code and visuals: https://mustcodeal.github.io/rust-game-hacking-book/pages/8/08/
