Byte Signatures and Pattern Scanning

Section: Why patterns help.

Lesson 5.2 recovered a live address by adding the current module base to a known RVA, relative virtual address,. That works for the exact build whose RVA you measured. After a game update, the gold-changing instruction may move within the module, so the old RVA can point at different code even when the base calculation is perfect.

A byte pattern searches the current module for a distinctive instruction sequence. It gives us a candidate location to check in each explicitly supported build; it does not by itself prove that the candidate is still the gold-changing instruction.

Image description: The gold-changing instruction in two builds

Some bytes encode registers or opcodes and stay stable. Others encode addresses or displacements and may change.

Section: What a signature actually describes.

The CPU, central processing unit, sees one continuous byte stream. The disassembler groups that stream into instructions, and each instruction may contain several kinds of information:

Table columns: Part; Plain-English meaning; Usually stable?.

Part: Opcode; Plain-English meaning: Which operation to perform, such as subtract or call; Usually stable?: Often.

Part: ModR/M and SIB; Plain-English meaning: Which registers and addressing shape to use; Usually stable?: Often.

Part: Displacement; Plain-English meaning: A field offset or distance from another address; Usually stable?: Sometimes.

Part: Immediate; Plain-English meaning: A number stored directly inside the instruction; Usually stable?: Depends on the rule.

Part: Relative target; Plain-English meaning: How far a call or jump travels; Usually stable?: Often changes when code moves.

Suppose two supported builds both subtract a value and then load a nearby field. The instruction shape may stay recognizable while the relative call target between those instructions moves. A useful signature keeps the stable shape and places wildcards over the changing target bytes.

Written out, that comparison looks like this. The same two instructions, taken from two builds of one game:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

The first three bytes are sub dword ptr [edi+4], eax: the operation, the registers, and the field offset, none of which the compiler had any reason to change. E8 is a call, and the four bytes after it hold a relative distance to the target, measured from the end of the call instruction. That distance shifts whenever either the calling code or the called function moves, even by a single byte, even though it still calls exactly the same function.

So the signature keeps the first four bytes and wildcards the last four:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Wildcards are not “bytes we forgot.” Each one here has a stated reason — “relative call displacement, changes whenever code moves” — and that written reason is the difference between a wildcard and a shrug. Too few wildcards make the signature fragile. Too many make it common and ambiguous.

Section: A signature can overfit one recording.

A pattern overfits when it memorizes accidental details from one executable instead of describing the instruction identity you meant to find. An exact 30-byte sequence may work perfectly on the build used to create it and fail after an unrelated compiler layout change. The opposite mistake is a pattern so loose that it matches ordinary code everywhere.

Table columns: Pattern behavior; Meaning; Correct response.

Pattern behavior: one match only in the design build; Meaning: may be overfitted; Correct response: compare another build you actually intend to support.

Pattern behavior: many matches in the design build; Meaning: under-specified; Correct response: add stable decoded context.

Pattern behavior: one decoded candidate in every declared profile; Meaning: appropriately scoped; Correct response: keep each build fingerprint and semantic check.

When supporting two exact builds, design the candidate signature with one build and test it against the other before calling it version-tolerant. Then reverse the test: bytes from each build should locate the same kind of instruction, not merely return one arbitrary address.

Do not weaken a pattern until it matches an unknown build and then declare success. If the course supports only one build, an exact fingerprint plus a build-specific signature is more honest than pretending the signature is portable. The goal is a pattern that finds the same instruction in every build you named, not the longest or shortest possible byte string.

Diagram. From Find the instruction in a supported build to Decode neighboring instructions. From Decode neighboring instructions to Compare bytes across supported builds. From Compare bytes across supported builds to Keep stable bytes; wildcard explained differences. From Keep stable bytes; wildcard explained differences to Scan only the intended executable section. From Scan only the intended executable section to Require exactly one match. From Require exactly one match to Decode again and verify meaning.

Section: Represent exact and wildcard bytes.

A written signature such as 29 47 04 E8 ?? ?? ?? ?? contains two different kinds of instruction: compare this byte exactly, or accept any byte at this position. Represent that choice in the type rather than reserving a magic value like zero. The matcher below receives copied code bytes, a starting offset, and that typed pattern; it returns false when the whole pattern would run past the buffer.

Code example. The code’s comments explain: 🔍 `Any` consumes exactly one byte too; it relaxes equality, not length. window.iter().zip(pattern).all(|(found, expected)| { matches!(expected, PatternByte::Any) || matches!(expected, PatternByte::Exact(value) if value equals found) })}

The safe matcher makes wildcard meaning and range failure explicit:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

The direct indexes can panic near the end of the buffer, while get turns an incomplete window into false. PatternByte prevents a magic byte such as hexadecimal 0 0 from secretly meaning “wildcard.” zip and all state the rule directly: each discovered byte must satisfy its corresponding pattern item.

Read this function from the outside inward:

bytes.get(range) requests a window without risking an out-of-bounds panic.

saturating_add prevents the end calculation from wrapping to a small number.

zip pairs every found byte with one pattern item.

all returns true only when every pair is acceptable.

Any accepts the found byte; Exact(value) accepts only that value.

The function borrows both slices. It does not copy the module again and does not own the pattern. That is why its signature uses &[u8] and &[PatternByte].

Section: Scan safely.

One safe comparison is not a scan yet. The next function tries every start position where the full pattern could fit, collecting offsets in the local buffer. If the buffer has three bytes and the pattern has two, both starts 0 and 1 must be considered; start 1 is easy to miss with an exclusive range.

Code example. The code’s comments explain: ✅ The inclusive end keeps the final legal starting position searchable. (0..=bytes.len() - pattern.len()) .filter(|&offset| matches_at(bytes, offset, pattern)) .collect()}

Use less than or equal to so a match beginning at the final possible offset is included.

For n input bytes and an m-byte pattern, this simple algorithm does at most roughly n times m comparisons. That is easy to reason about and fast enough for bounded course modules. More advanced search algorithms matter only after measurement shows this loop is the bottleneck.

The early return handles two important edge cases. An empty pattern would otherwise “match” at every offset, and subtracting a longer pattern length from the input length would underflow.

Section: Parse a friendly pattern.

The scanner’s type is precise, but writing PatternByte::Exact eight times for every trial is awkward. A small parser turns the familiar spaced hex form into that type. A mistyped token becomes an error before any memory is scanned:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

collect() is doing extra work here: the iterator produces Result<PatternByte> values and combines them into Result<Vec<PatternByte>>. The first invalid hex token stops the parse and returns its error. No half-parsed pattern escapes. This is the same illustrative two-build pattern we just derived, so the four ?? tokens still mean the call’s changing relative distance. The runnable Wesnoth lab below uses a different, exact three-byte signature from its one pinned executable; it does not claim that hypothetical call follows the real gold instruction.

Section: Scan the correct range.

Do not scan an entire process by default. Locate the intended module and executable section, copy that bounded region, and scan the local buffer.

Image description: The loaded Wesnoth modules

For a PE, portable executable, image, confirm:

DOS and PE signatures;

section table bounds;

executable characteristic;

virtual address plus size stays in the module.

Libraries such as goblin can parse PE files, but live in-memory images still need careful address and section validation.

This separation matters. ReadProcessMemory works at the Windows boundary and can fail because a page changed. Once the bytes are in a local Vec<u8>, the matching loop uses only checked slices: no remote pointers, no changing protections, and no partial Windows reads during comparisons.

Section: Require one match.

The scan returns a list because one pattern can occur more than once. Before turning an offset into a candidate instruction address, make the three possible counts explicit. Returning the first entry would disguise an ambiguous signature as a successful find.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Picking the first of five matches is not version tolerance.

The three outcomes mean different things:

zero matches means the build, range, or pattern assumption is wrong;

one match means the signature has located one candidate, which still needs semantic verification;

several matches mean the signature does not contain enough identity.

Do not “fix” ambiguity by silently lengthening the scan to another unrelated section. Extend the pattern into the instructions around the intended one until only it matches.

Section: Verify surrounding meaning.

After a match:

disassemble the surrounding bytes;

confirm whole expected instructions;

verify the relative target or field offset;

check the supported module fingerprint;

reject an unknown build.

Image description: Comparing a signature across versions

Section: Test edge cases.

A two-byte pattern at the end of a three-byte buffer exercises the range boundary that ordinary middle-of-buffer examples miss. The expected offset is 1, so this test catches an accidental exclusive upper bound:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Follow that boundary test as two candidate windows. All byte values below are hexadecimal; offset 1 must be included in the scan:

Watch it happenSliding a two-byte pattern over a three-byte buffer

A buffer of three bytes, 10 20 30, and a two-byte pattern, 20 30. The pattern is tried at offset 0, where 10 does not equal 20, and then at offset 1, where both bytes match. Offset 1 is the final legal start, so the search must include it.

Additional detail: Read the steps.

The scanner has copied three bytes from the game, 10 20 30, and is looking for the two-byte pattern 20 30. Both positions must match exactly; this pattern has no wildcards.

How many places can the pattern start? The last legal start is 3 minus 2 equals 1, so the offsets to try are 0 through 1, inclusive: two candidate windows.

Offset 0: the window holds 10 and 20. The first exact byte, 10, is not 20, so this window does not match, and the second byte is never needed.

Slide the pattern one byte to offset 1: the window holds 20 and 30.

Both exact comparisons pass: 20 equals 20 and 30 equals 30. This is the final legal window, and it holds the only match.

find_all returns offset 1, so the test expects [1]. If the loop stopped one start too early, with an exclusive upper bound, it would skip this window and report nothing.

A range boundary is part of correctness. Matching bytes still leaves the separate checks for build identity and instruction meaning.

Also test empty patterns, all wildcards, a pattern longer than input, no matches, overlapping matches, and multiple matches.

A useful test asks the program to do something and checks an observable result. It does not merely repeat the code it is supposedly checking:

Code example. The code’s comments explain: ❌ This only proves that a two-item array has two items.#[test]fn pattern_has_the_length_we_just_wrote() { let pattern equals [hexadecimal 2 0, hexadecimal 3 0]; assert_eq!(pattern.len(), 2);}

By contrast, the boundary test above can catch a real off-by-one bug. That is the standard to use when AI, artificial intelligence, or autocomplete suggests tests too: ask what incorrect implementation would make the test fail. If the answer is “none,” the test is decoration.

A pattern only finds where bytes match. It does not replace target-version checks or instruction decoding.

Section: Read the complete program as a pipeline.

The executable at the end of the lesson has five phases:

Process::open_by_name finds the exact target and owns its Windows process handle.

process.module returns the current base and mapped size of wesnoth.exe.

process.regions asks Windows how that module is divided and keeps readable executable regions.

Each accepted region is copied before .windows(3) compares local slices.

The program prints every match and refuses success unless the match count is exactly one.

Notice what it does not do: it does not scan every allocation, patch the result, or assume matching bytes prove the instruction’s meaning. Those are separate decisions with separate checks.

Section: Run it against Wesnoth.

The course binary opens the live 32-bit wesnoth.exe, finds its current main-module base, visits its readable executable regions, and searches for the exact gold-subtraction instruction bytes 29 42 04. Those are measured bytes from the pinned Wesnoth build, not the illustrative 29 47 04 E8 ... sequence above. It prints every match and refuses to call the result usable unless there is exactly one.

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

The complete executable is pattern_scanner.rs. Shared ToolHelp module discovery, memory-region validation, and bounded reads are in process.rs.

Additional detail: Complete lab source: pattern_scanner.rs.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Notice the order: restrict to the correct module, restrict again to readable executable regions, copy each region, scan the safe local copy, then demand one result. A three-byte match identifies a candidate only; patching requires a separately verified address and expected bytes.

Section: When results are wrong.

When a scan result is wrong

Table columns: Symptom; Most likely question to ask.

Symptom: No matches; Most likely question to ask: Is this the exact supported executable and correct architecture?.

Symptom: Many matches; Most likely question to ask: Is the signature too short or too full of wildcards?.

Symptom: Read failure; Most likely question to ask: Did the region change, or was its protection classified incorrectly?.

Symptom: Match points into data; Most likely question to ask: Did the scan include a non-executable section?.

Symptom: Correct bytes, wrong behavior; Most likely question to ask: Did you decode enough surrounding instructions and verify the function?.

Error messages should preserve this distinction. “Scanner failed” is not actionable; “pattern matched six locations in executable regions” tells the learner exactly which assumption to revisit.

Full lesson, including exact code and visuals: https://mustcodeal.github.io/rust-game-hacking-book/pages/7/04/
