In-Process DLLs and Loader Boundaries

Section: External versus in-process.

An external tool uses Windows to cross a process boundary. An in-process library is loaded into the target and shares its virtual address space.

The previous lesson reconstructed a DLL, dynamic link library, function’s contract: how arguments arrive, what the result means, and who owns pointed-to data. The preceding chapter showed how code and imports become a running image. Here we create the other side of that boundary: a Rust library loaded as a guest inside one exact game build. We will follow its loading and cleanup, learn how detours and import hooks redirect calls, and give the tool input and menus. The chapter closes by putting those pieces into an architecture with one owner for each resource and an explicit cleanup path.

The two routes reach the same bytes through different doors:

Diagram. From ReadProcessMemory / WriteProcessMemory to the game's memory. The connection is labelled: crosses a process boundary, one call at a time. From DLL code, loaded into the target to the game's memory. The connection is labelled: ordinary pointer read/write, same address space.

That makes pointer access direct, but not automatically safe. An address discovered in a debugger can still be null, stale, misaligned, or wrong for this game version.

Sharing an address space removes one copying boundary; it does not create shared ownership. The game still owns its objects, decides when they move or disappear, and may update them from other threads. Your DLL is a guest that can observe an address only while the assumptions that justified it remain true.

Before dereferencing, state the contract in four parts:

which exact build and game state define the layout;

which object owns the bytes;

which thread may change or destroy them;

how long this particular pointer remains valid.

Resolve short-lived pointers near the point of use. Copy the few fields you need into a local snapshot, validate them, then release the borrowed view of game memory.

The safe path has distinct stages instead of one giant startup function:

Diagram walkthrough: Follow an in-process tool's lifetime. Step 1: Load the library. State: DLL loaded. Windows maps the DLL into the target process. Step 2: Keep DllMain small. State: tiny callback. The loader callback does only safe, minimal work. Step 3: Start explicitly. State: gha_start. A separate export begins work after loading finishes. Step 4: Verify the build. State: supported build?. Refuse a target whose bytes or layout are unsupported. Step 5: Own worker state. State: worker active. The worker holds the lab resources it will later release. Step 6: Request shutdown. State: stop requested. Stop new work before removing any owned feature. Step 7: Restore and unload. State: clean exit. Return changed state and release ownership in order. Loading, starting, verifying, working, and stopping are separate phases; cleanup follows the ownership established during startup.

Each stage earns the capabilities used by the next one, and shutdown releases them in a controlled order.

Section: Create a DLL project.

The first artifact is a library that Windows can load, not a standalone executable with a main function. Start with Cargo’s library template; the following configuration then asks Rust to emit a C-compatible dynamic library and includes the Windows types used at its boundary:

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Configure Cargo:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

cdylib tells the compiler to build a Windows DLL with a C-compatible boundary.

Section: Keep DllMain tiny.

Windows calls DllMain while holding the loader lock. Many operations are unsafe there: starting complicated work, loading other DLLs, waiting on threads, or calling code that might do those things.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Normally the compiler mangles a function’s name so it can tell apart two functions with the same short name in different modules. #[no_mangle] turns that off and exports the bare name DllMain instead. If another object linked into the same DLL also exports a symbol named DllMain, or if some other code calls this export assuming a different signature, the linker or loader cannot catch the mismatch the way Rust’s type checker normally would. Rust 2024 marks #[unsafe(no_mangle)] to make that unchecked, program-wide promise visible at the call site instead of leaving it implicit.

Section: Export an explicit start function.

Let the host or lab loader call a separate function after loading:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

This separates loading from initialization and prevents accidental double-starts.

Section: Read known in-process data.

Wrap a verified field rather than exposing raw pointers everywhere:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

An even better design resolves the object each time from a module-relative path and checks readable regions before dereferencing.

Section: Make the Wesnoth gold DLL actually change gold.

For Wesnoth 1.14.9, 32-bit Windows, use the same chain as the external tool. Only the two offsets and the root address are fixed; the two pointer values in between are whatever Wesnoth allocated this run:

Diagram. From PLAYER_ROOT hexadecimal 0 1 7 E E D 1 8 (fixed) to player object. The connection is labelled: read u32. From player object to game-pointer field. The connection is labelled: + GAME_OFFSET (hexadecimal 0 A 9 0). From game-pointer field to game object. The connection is labelled: read u32. From game object to gold field (u32, writable). The connection is labelled: + GOLD_OFFSET (hexadecimal 0 0 0 4).

The resolver below reads both live pointer values in that order. The constants identify the known root and field offsets; the returned gold pointer belongs only to the current verified match, and the worker uses it for one write.

Code example. The code’s comments explain: / Resolves the live gold pointer in the documented Wesnoth build.////// # Safety/// The caller must first verify the exact 32-bit target build and that a/// local match is active. Each intermediate pointer must be readable.unsafe fn wesnoth_gold_pointer() to anyhow::Result<*mut u32> { // 🛡️ SAFETY: target/build/state checks are the caller's responsibility. let player equals unsafe { PLAYER_ROOT.read() } as usize; anyhow::ensure!(player not equal to 0, "player pointer is null");

Call set_wesnoth_gold(999) from the worker started by gha_start. Return to the local match and trigger a UI refresh. If no match is active, the function must return an error instead of dereferencing zero.

This is a real internal memory hack: the DLL shares Wesnoth’s address space and writes the live gold field directly. The three raw dereferences are isolated and explained instead of being scattered through the thread loop.

Section: Load it and call the exported start function.

The matching injector performs two remote calls. First it runs LoadLibraryW in Wesnoth. Then it maps the same DLL locally without running it, finds the relative offset of gha_start, adds that offset to the DLL base returned by Wesnoth, and starts a second remote thread at that export.

That second step is important. LoadLibraryW returning means Windows finished the loader-lock portion of loading. Only then does gha_start create the worker. The complete implementation is in injector.rs, and the DLL entry points are in dll.rs.

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

With a local match already active, the worker resolves the chain and writes 999. This is the proof for the lesson: the injected library has executed inside Wesnoth and changed a live, spendable game value.

Section: Do not hide the target assumptions.

Put version-specific facts together:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

At startup:

confirm the module exists;

confirm the supported build fingerprint ;

resolve the pointer path;

check each pointer;

only then enable the lab feature.

Section: Unloading is a protocol.

Background threads must stop before the DLL unloads. Use an atomic stop flag or a channel, wait for workers to exit from outside DllMain, restore patches, and then unload.

The important lesson is architectural: loading, running, stopping, and unloading are separate states. Model them deliberately instead of relying on global booleans and timing luck.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Diagram labels, in drawing order: gha_start spawns the worker; stop requested; workers joined, patches restored; Loaded; Running; Stopping; Stopped.

The type system cannot make an unknown game address safe, but it can make the rest of the lifecycle much harder to mix up.

Lifecycle states should control capabilities. Loaded may allow only bookkeeping, Running may own workers and patches, Stopping may request cleanup but reject new work, and Stopped must own nothing that points into executable code. This is stronger than a single started: bool, which cannot distinguish “never started” from “cleanup still in progress.”

Full lesson, including exact code and visuals: https://mustcodeal.github.io/rust-game-hacking-book/pages/8/01/
