Import Table Hooks

Section: What the Import Address Table does.

The detours in Lesson 6.4 changed instruction bytes at a verified site. Sometimes a program already calls a function through a table of imported addresses. In that case, one verified table entry can change the destination while leaving the call instruction in place.

Your program can call MessageBoxW without knowing where user32.dll will load. The PE, portable executable, import data says, “I need this named function.” The Windows loader finds its live address and writes that address into the Import Address Table, or IAT.

Later, a normal imported call follows the pointer stored in that table:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

If a program deliberately replaces its own slot, the same call site follows the replacement:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

This lab changes only the IAT of the course executable itself. It does not target another process, hide from security software, or bypass protections.

During the lab, the call still begins at the same instruction; only the pointer in the table chooses a different route:

Diagram. From call site: MessageBoxW(...) to IAT slot for MessageBoxW. From IAT slot for MessageBoxW to hooked_message_box. From hooked_message_box to ORIGINAL_MESSAGE_BOX (saved pointer to the real MessageBoxW).

When the patch owner is dropped, it puts the saved original pointer back into that same IAT slot.

Section: Keep the function signature exact.

The replacement must accept the same arguments and use the same Windows calling convention:

Code example. The code’s comments explain: 🔁 SAFETY: install() saved the original pointer from this exact IAT slot. let original: RawMessageBoxW equals unsafe { std::mem::transmute(address) }; // 🛡️ SAFETY: the signature and Windows ABI, application binary interface, match MessageBoxW. unsafe { original( window, w!("Hook reached the replacement IAT entry."), caption, style, ) }}

extern "system" tells the compiler to use the calling convention Windows expects. If the convention, parameter sizes, or return type are wrong, the stack or registers can be interpreted incorrectly.

Section: Find the import directory.

For a loaded PE32 image:

get the current executable base with GetModuleHandleW(NULL);

verify MZ and PE\0\0;

require optional-header magic hexadecimal 1 0 B;

read the import-directory RVA, relative virtual address, from data-directory entry 1;

walk 20-byte import descriptors until the all-zero terminator;

find user32.dll;

walk its lookup names and IAT slots together;

find MessageBoxW by name.

Step 7 is the one that surprises people: each imported DLL, dynamic link library, has two parallel arrays, not one. The compiler writes them as identical lists of equal length, and the loader overwrites only one of them.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Before the module is loaded, both arrays hold the same name references. During loading, Windows resolves each name and writes the resulting live address into the matching IAT slot, leaving the lookup table alone. That is exactly why you walk the two together: the lookup table still records which function this entry is, while the IAT records where that function currently lives. Searching the IAT by itself gives you addresses with no names attached; searching the lookup table by itself gives you names with nothing to patch.

(Some binaries ship without the separate lookup table. In a loaded image, the IAT has already been overwritten with live function addresses, so it cannot be treated as a list of name RVAs. This name-based lab refuses that case with a clear error. Handling it would require a different, independently verified way to identify the desired slot.)

The important matching loop is:

Code example. The code’s comments explain: 🧭 Names identify the function; FirstThunk identifies the live pointer // slot that the loader filled and the hook must replace. let slot_rva equals first_thunk .checked_add(index * 4) .context("IAT overflowed")?; anyhow::ensure!(slot_rva + 4 less than or equal to image_size, "IAT slot outside image"); let slot equals (base + slot_rva) as *mut u32; // ✅ The installer now owns this validated four-byte PE32 slot.}

The limits stop a malformed table from becoming an endless walk through memory.

Section: Change one pointer, then restore it.

VirtualProtect temporarily makes the four-byte slot writable. The code immediately restores the old page protection:

Diagram. From VirtualProtect(slot, 4, PAGE_READWRITE) save old protection to slot.write_volatile(value). From slot.write_volatile(value) to VirtualProtect(slot, 4, old) restore original protection.

The helper below receives a validated PE32 import slot and the replacement 32-bit function pointer. It performs exactly those three operations and returns success only after the original page protection is restored:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Changing one pointer is not the whole lifecycle. The owning guard below remembers the original destination and puts it back when the guard is dropped, so the third message box in this lab uses the normal import again:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

This is RAII applied to reverse engineering: owning the modification also means owning the cleanup.

If restoring page protection fails after the pointer write, the slot may already contain the replacement even though write_slot returns an error. A complete installer must retain enough state to retry or roll back that partial installation; the returned Result alone does not undo it.

Section: Run the complete three-message proof.

Diagram walkthrough: Follow one imported call before, during, and after the hook. Step 1: Identify the import. State: user32.dll!MessageBoxW. The import name identifies the intended function. The loader has already resolved its address in this PE32 executable. Step 2: Find the matching slot. State: name index to four-byte IAT slot. Walk lookup names and IAT entries together. The matching name selects the slot; bounds checks prove that the four-byte slot belongs to the loaded image. Step 3: Keep the original route. State: saved pointer to real MessageBoxW. Save the slot value before changing it. The replacement uses that callable original, and the patch owner keeps the same value for restoration. Step 4: Install the replacement. State: IAT slot to hooked_message_box. Make the slot writable, write the replacement pointer, and restore the previous page protection. The call instruction remains in place. Step 5: Follow the redirected call. State: replacement to saved original. A normal MessageBoxW call now reaches the replacement. Its matching Windows ABI lets it forward to the saved original with the replacement message text. Step 6: Restore the normal route. State: IAT slot to real MessageBoxW. When cleanup succeeds, IatPatch has written the saved pointer back through the protection-changing helper. The next imported call reaches the original function again. The three-message lab observes the normal, redirected, and restored routes. A failed protection change can leave partial installation state, so restoration must remain owned until cleanup succeeds.

Run this from windows-labs in the Windows VM, virtual machine,. The three message boxes let you observe the original import, the redirected call, and the restored call in that order.

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

You should see three message boxes:

the untouched call displays “The normal import runs first.”

the hooked call displays “Hook reached the replacement IAT entry.”

after IatPatch is dropped, the restored call displays “The original import is restored.”

Those three visible states prove interception and restoration. The full buildable source—including bounded PE parsing and every unsafe invariant—is iat_hook_lab.rs.

Section: How this connects to game labs.

An injected course DLL lives inside the game process, so the same idea can observe an imported graphics or file function used by that exact build. Before changing a game IAT:

prove the function is actually imported by the main executable;

use the exact function signature;

reject an unknown PE format or module version;

keep the hook tiny and non-blocking;

restore the original slot before unloading the DLL.

The Urban Terror OpenGL chapter uses an instruction detour because its verified draw path is not expressed as a convenient main-executable IAT slot. Choose a hook based on the real call path, not because one technique sounds fashionable.

References: Microsoft PE format, GetModuleHandleW, and importing functions using __declspec(dllimport).

Full lesson, including exact code and visuals: https://mustcodeal.github.io/rust-game-hacking-book/pages/8/04/
