File Hashes and Digital Signatures

Section: A hash and a signature answer different questions.

The manifest in Lesson 9.7 records the bytes before and after a mod installation. Its hash detects an unexpected later change. To decide whether a downloaded game or mod came from the publisher you expected, we need a different question: who approved these bytes?

A SHA-256 hash is a fingerprint of exact bytes. Change one byte and the fingerprint should change dramatically. A saved baseline can answer:

“Are these bytes identical to the bytes I recorded earlier?”

It cannot answer who created the original file. A hash does not create trust; it only moves trust from wherever you obtained the hash onto the bytes now on your disk.

That distinction has practical teeth. If you download mod.zip and mod.zip.sha256 from the same page, and someone is able to change that page, they can change both — and the two will agree perfectly:

Diagram. From compromised download page to mod.zip (attacker's bytes). From compromised download page to mod.zip.sha256 (attacker's hash of those bytes). From mod.zip (attacker's bytes) to you hash mod.zip and compare. From mod.zip.sha256 (attacker's hash of those bytes) to you hash mod.zip and compare. From you hash mod.zip and compare to verification succeeds — but proves nothing: the attacker wrote both files. The connection is labelled: matches.

Verification reports success and has proven nothing. A hash is only worth checking when it reached you by a route the attacker does not control: a signed release, a genuinely separate channel, or a value you recorded yourself from a copy you already had reason to trust.

An Authenticode signature connects the file’s digest to a signing certificate and asks Windows to apply a trust policy. It can help answer:

“Does this file still match a signature made by a publisher whose certificate chain Windows trusts under this policy?”

Neither answer proves that software has no bugs or that you personally intended to install this version.

Section: How a signature is made and checked.

A digital signature is a number computed from a file’s hash with a secret key, which anyone can check with a matching key that is not secret. It fixes the compromised-page problem above: an attacker who controls the page can replace the file and the hash, but cannot produce a signature that checks out, because they do not have the secret.

That needs public-key cryptography, where keys are made in pairs. The private key never leaves the publisher. The public key is given to everyone; for Authenticode it travels inside the publisher’s certificate. The pair has one property that makes everything work: a signature made with the private key is accepted by the matching public key and by no other, and knowing the public key does not let anyone work out the private one.

Diagram. From game.exe to SHA-256 hash. From SHA-256 hash to private key turns the hash into a signature. From game.exe as downloaded to SHA-256 hash, computed again. From signature and certificate to public key from the certificate. From public key from the certificate to does the signature match this hash?. From SHA-256 hash, computed again to does the signature match this hash?. From private key turns the hash into a signature to signature and certificate.

Walk the two ways it can fail. Change one byte of the file and your machine computes a different hash, so the signature no longer matches it. Replace the signature with one the attacker made using their own key pair, and it only checks out against the attacker’s public key, whose certificate Windows does not trust.

A comparison often used for public keys is an open padlock: you hand out as many as you like and keep the only key, so anyone can lock a box for you and only you can open it. That picture describes encrypting a message to someone. A signature runs the other way: only the private-key holder can make one, and anyone can check it. Nothing is hidden, either; a signed file stays perfectly readable. The signature only proves which key approved these exact bytes.

Why can nobody forge one? Real keys are numbers hundreds of digits long, chosen so that checking a signature takes a fraction of a millisecond while making one without the private key would take longer than the age of the universe. The same kind of gap shows up with small numbers. Multiplying 7 times 17 equals 119 is quick. Given only 119, finding the two numbers means trying divisors: 2 fails, 3 fails, 5 fails, and 7 gives 119 divided by 7 equals 17. Checking a proposed answer is one division. RSA, a common signature scheme, builds its keys on this gap between multiplying and factoring, with numbers so large that the trying never finishes.

The same machinery sits behind the padlock icon in a web browser, driver signing in Lesson 12.4, and a console’s secure boot in Lesson 14.4. Its limits are the ones this lesson keeps returning to: a signature says who approved the bytes, not that the bytes are safe, and if a publisher’s private key is stolen, the thief can sign anything until the certificate is revoked.

Section: Unsigned does not mean malicious.

Many open-source game builds are unsigned, self-built, or distributed in archives without Authenticode. Wesnoth, AssaultCube, or Urban Terror files can legitimately report “no embedded signature,” depending on the exact build and distributor.

Treat the result as one fact:

Table columns: Result; Reasonable next question.

Result: Trusted signature; Reasonable next question: Does the publisher and file version match the source I expected?.

Result: No embedded signature; Reasonable next question: Does the official project publish hashes or reproducible release artifacts?.

Result: Explicitly distrusted; Reasonable next question: Why did Windows policy reject this publisher/signature?.

Result: Other failure; Reasonable next question: Was the file damaged, unsupported, expired, or checked under a limited classroom policy?.

Section: WinVerifyTrust returns a status code, not a Result.

The Win32 function returns a LONG. Microsoft says only exact zero means the requested trust action succeeded. Do not use HRESULT-style “success if nonnegative” logic.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Known nonzero values help us print plain-English explanations. Unknown statuses remain failures and are printed in hexadecimal for investigation.

Section: Trust verification has state and policy choices.

WINTRUST_FILE_INFO points to the file path. WINTRUST_DATA describes how the trust provider should work:

WTD_UI_NONE prevents pop-up dialogs;

WTD_CHOICE_FILE selects the file-info union member;

WTD_STATEACTION_VERIFY begins verification and may create provider state ;

WTD_STATEACTION_CLOSE releases that state afterward;

WTD_DISABLE_MD2_MD4 refuses two obsolete digest algorithms ;

WTD_REVOKE_NONE skips revocation checking in this offline classroom run;

WTD_CACHE_ONLY_URL_RETRIEVAL avoids network retrieval in this reproducible lab.

Those last two choices have a tradeoff: the result does not include a fresh revocation check. A release pipeline with network access should define and test a stricter revocation policy instead of treating this offline classroom result as the final word.

Section: Build the combined inspector.

run calls these in order; WinVerifyTrust itself is called twice, once to verify and once to release the state the first call created:

Diagram. From sha256(path) stream the file, hash it to verify_authenticode(path). From verify_authenticode(path) to WinVerifyTrust dwStateAction equals VERIFY. From WinVerifyTrust dwStateAction equals VERIFY to status: 0 means trusted. From status: 0 means trusted to WinVerifyTrust again dwStateAction equals CLOSE. From WinVerifyTrust again dwStateAction equals CLOSE to meaning(status) explains the VERIFY call's result.

Additional detail: Complete lab source: signature_check.rs.

Code example. The code’s comments explain: SAFETY: both structures contain valid sizes and pointers that remain // alive through the call. UI is disabled and the file path is terminated. let status equals unsafe { WinVerifyTrust( HWND::default(), &mut action, (&mut trust_data as *mut WINTRUST_DATA).cast(), ) };

Section: Why keep the wide path alive?.

PCWSTR is only a pointer. It does not own the UTF-16 vector. wide_path, file_info, and trust_data all remain local variables until both WinVerifyTrust calls finish, so every pointer stays valid.

This is why the unsafe comment names lifetimes instead of saying only “Windows API, application programming interface, call.” A useful safety comment explains the exact facts the compiler cannot verify.

Section: Check your installations.

In the Windows VM, virtual machine,, build the checker from windows-labs and give it one EXE path at a time. Record each reported hash beside the exact file and build; the signature result applies only to the file you supplied.

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

A SHA-256 value belongs to one exact file, so it means something only next to the game version and download source it came from. Re-run the tool after installing a mod or update: every file that changed gets a new hash, which is expected for the files the mod or update replaced and unexplained for any other.

Some Windows components are signed through catalogs rather than an embedded signature. This lab checks the embedded signature on the selected game EXE. If you expand it to inventory every DLL, dynamic link library, loaded beside the game, add explicit catalog-signature handling instead of reporting those files as simply unsigned.

Combine this lesson with module_inventory: inventory tells you what actually loaded, the hash identifies exact bytes, and Authenticode adds one publisher-trust signal.

The buildable source is signature_check.rs.

References: WinVerifyTrust, WINTRUST_DATA, WINTRUST_FILE_INFO, and Authenticode time stamping.

Full lesson, including exact code and visuals: https://mustcodeal.github.io/rust-game-hacking-book/pages/9/07/
