Why Snapshots Need Guarded Actions

The observer in the previous lesson copied player state for display. A tool that changes state faces a harder problem: gold can change after the read but before the write. If income arrives in that gap, a blind write may overwrite it. We need a pipeline that treats every observation as temporary evidence.

Section: One long function hides where it can fail.

A beginner tool often grows as one long function:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

That can work once, but every step depends on facts collected earlier. The game may restart, change maps, end a turn, replace an object, or update the value while the tool is still running.

A more reliable tool separates six phases:

Animated diagram: Capture twice, recheck, then write, and read back. A pointer chain in game memory leads to a gold value of 100. The tool captures it twice, but income changes the gold to 130 in between, so the two captures differ and are discarded. Two new captures agree, the snapshot is kept, a fresh capture just before the write still matches, the tool writes 500, and reading back gives 500. Step 1: The tool wants to write 500 into the game’s gold. It does not trust one read, so it first captures the whole pointer chain: player, side, gold address, and gold. Step 2: Attempt 1, capture 1: the four values are read and kept together as one snapshot. Step 3: Capture 2 reads the chain again. While it runs, income arrives and the game changes the gold from 100 to 130. Step 4: The two snapshots differ in the gold field, so the tool refuses to act on either one. A blind write would have overwritten the income. Step 5: Attempt 2: the tool throws the pair away and captures twice more. This time both captures agree in all four fields. Step 6: The tool keeps that snapshot. The caller asked for Some(500), so it will propose a write. (None would mean observe only.) Step 7: Recheck, then write: one more capture right before the write. Only if it still equals the snapshot does the write happen. Step 8: Read back: the tool reads the gold again and compares it with the 500 it asked for. Equal means the write took effect. This follows the write branch when snapshots agree; None remains observation-only and a changed snapshot stops the write.

The important idea is not extra code. It is that data crosses a gate before the tool acts on it. A raw address read once may already be out of date. A Snapshot captured twice with equal results was consistent at that moment. A write happens only if a fresh capture, taken immediately before it, still equals the snapshot.

Section: Store one snapshot in one typed value.

This lesson records the entire Wesnoth pointer path, not only the final gold number:

Labelled memory diagram. cell 1: player: usize; cell 2: side: usize; cell 3: gold_address: usize; cell 4: gold: u32. The whole Snapshot. Comparing all four fields catches a changed pointer link, not only a changed gold number.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Why keep all four fields?

player changing means the root now reaches another object.

side changing can mean the active faction or match state changed.

gold_address is the exact destination a later action would touch.

gold is the value the learner actually observed.

Equality now asks a useful question: “Did the whole chain and its value remain the same?” It is stronger than comparing only the final address.

Section: Two equal reads are useful, not magical.

The tool captures twice and accepts the result only when both snapshots agree:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

This is a small optimistic consistency check. The tool does not stop the game. It assumes a short read will usually see a quiet moment, then checks that assumption.

⚠️ Two equal reads are not a mathematical proof that no intermediate state existed. They are a practical gate for a tiny offline lab. A debugger pause, a game-provided snapshot API, application programming interface,, or a version counter is stronger when a larger structure must be perfectly atomic.

The retry cap matters too. A loop that waits forever for stability can make a broken tool look frozen.

Section: Capabilities follow the chosen action.

The command has two modes:

Terminal window

Code example. The code’s comments explain: Observation only: requests query + read accesssnapshot_pipeline.exe Explicit local-lab change: also requests operation + write accesssnapshot_pipeline.exe --set 888

The program decides whether it needs write rights before opening the process:

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

This is capability-oriented design in plain English: if the user asked only to look, the handle should be unable to write.

Section: Validate, write, verify, and recover.

The write path has three gates:

re-capture and require the same snapshot;

write exactly four little-endian bytes to the verified gold field;

read the field back and require the requested result.

Diagram. From stable_snapshot() again to equals observed snapshot?. From equals observed snapshot? to stop: nothing written. The connection is labelled: no. From equals observed snapshot? to write_u32(gold_address, replacement). The connection is labelled: yes. From write_u32(gold_address, replacement) to read_u32(gold_address). From read_u32(gold_address) to equals replacement?. From equals replacement? to report failure. The connection is labelled: no. From equals replacement? to success. The connection is labelled: yes.

In the code below, observed is the snapshot the caller approved. A fresh snapshot must match it before any write; afterward, a read-back must equal replacement. Each added line enforces one arrow in the diagram.

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

This is not a database transaction: Windows cannot automatically roll back the game. It is a guarded action with a checked precondition and postcondition. That pattern also fits toggles, patches, save editors, configuration tools, and mod installers.

Section: Complete buildable tool.

The code below is the complete binary used by the lesson.

Additional detail: Complete lab source: snapshot_pipeline.rs.

Code example. The code’s comments explain: 🔒 Read-only mode never requests VM_WRITE or VM_OPERATION rights. let process equals Process::open_by_name("wesnoth.exe", replacement.is_some())?; anyhow::ensure!( process.is_32_bit()?, "this profile requires 32-bit Wesnoth 1.14.9" ); let observed equals stable_snapshot(&process)?; ✅ Read back the postcondition instead of assuming the write succeeded. let written equals process.read_u32(observed.gold_address)?; anyhow::ensure!( written equals value, "read-back value was {written}, expected {value}" ); println!("Changed gold from {} to {written}.", observed.gold); } else { println!("Observation only. Run with `--set GOLD` for the guarded local-lab write."); } Ok(())}

The same source is available as snapshot_pipeline.rs.

Section: Build and run against Wesnoth.

Use the exact 32-bit Wesnoth 1.14.9 course build, start a disposable local match, and build the Windows binary:

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

Confirm that the printed address and value match Cheat Engine or x64dbg. Then perform one explicit change:

Terminal window

Code example. The surrounding prose explains this example; the full lesson contains the exact code.

The visible gold should become 888. End the match and run it again: the tool should report a null or unstable object instead of writing to address zero.

Section: Read failures as information.

Table columns: Failure; What it means; Correct response.

Failure: Player root is null; What it means: No supported local match is ready; Correct response: Start the match; do not invent an address.

Failure: Snapshot keeps changing; What it means: The pointer path changes between captures; Correct response: Stop after the retry cap.

Failure: Architecture is not 32-bit; What it means: This profile does not describe the target; Correct response: Refuse the run.

Failure: State differs before write; What it means: The earlier snapshot is out of date; Correct response: Write nothing and capture again.

Failure: Read-back differs; What it means: The requested postcondition was not reached; Correct response: Report failure; do not print success.

A trustworthy tool has more useful stop paths than force paths. 🛡️

Section: Extend the architecture.

Once this pipeline is clear, try these controlled upgrades:

add a target-profile name and executable hash to the snapshot;

attach a timestamp and module base to each capture;

replace two reads with a game-owned frame counter when one is known;

make Action::Observe and Action::SetGold(u32) an enum;

unit-test decision logic with fake snapshots, without opening a process.

Keep remote I/O at the edge. The middle of the program should compare ordinary typed values.

Section: What the write gate establishes.

The snapshot carries player and side identity along with gold and its address, so a changed object path invalidates a proposed action. Two equal captures are a bounded consistency check, not a lock on the running game. Observation mode therefore keeps a read-only handle. When an action is requested, a fresh precondition check guards the only write, and a read-back checks its postcondition before the tool reports success.

Full lesson, including exact code and visuals: https://mustcodeal.github.io/rust-game-hacking-book/pages/4/02/
